# Zeno API documentation

The zeno api returns data from our zeno agents. The principle we are adopting is that the data retruned by the api are langgraph state updates.

The reasoning behind this is the following:

- We can use pydantic classes for typing the state ensuring consistency
- Minimal middle layer between the agent and the frontend
- Focus on a synced state on frontend and backend

## Type of updates

We have two main types of updates: AI messages and tool updates. Both are state updates, they are not different from that perspective. However, AI messages operate only on the "messages" list in the state (appending new messages), while the tool updates add to "messages" but also update other state varaibles such as aoi, chart data, dataset picked, etc.

1. The AI messages are the messages directly generated by the LLM based on questions and tool output. This includes things like thinking through a problem, too lcal lplanning, asking for clarifications, etc. These messages are always just text.
2. Tool output is the result from tool calls. These updates include the tool call itself (incl what inputs were used), and the outputs. The outputs being changes in state variables (such as dataset, or aoi).

So the complexity comes from tool updates, which we will describe in detail for each tool below.

## Agent state

The agent has all the data that the zeno needs to work. The core are the messages, which is a list of messages. The messages are the human messages (queries), the AI messages (LLM response), and tool messages (output of tools).

The state includes a lot of variables that are for internal use only and that the frontend application can safely ignore. They are currently returned by the API, but we might filter some of these on the api layers in the future.

## Tool updates

Tool updates create new messages in the message history, but more importantly directly update other state variables. These state variable udpates are the pieces of data that the frontend can use to render. Below a list of tools and their respective updates.

### Pick aoi

The first tool is picking an AOI. It updates either the `aoi`, or the `subregion_aois` fields.

The `aoi` has the following structure

```json
{}
```

The `subregion_aois` has the following structure.

```json
{}
```

The other fields are for internal use and can be ingnored on the frontend.


```python
class AgentState(TypedDict):
    # Adds one tool message string to the message history
    messages: Annotated[Sequence[BaseMessage], add_messages]
    # Structured aoi, contains geojson, name, and ID fields.
    aoi: dict
    subregion_aois: pd.DataFrame
    subregion: str
    aoi_name: str
    subtype: str
```

### Pick dataset

The second tool is responsible to pick a dataset. It sends a tool message and updates only one addtional state variable.

```python
class AgentState(TypedDict):
    # Adds one tool message string to the message history
    messages: Annotated[Sequence[BaseMessage], add_messages]
    # Structured dictionary containing the dataset info
    dataset: dict
```

### Generate insights tool

The insights are [being created at the moment](https://github.com/wri/project-zeno/tree/tool/create-chart), we will document the insights structure here soon.
